.\"
.TH launchd 8 "July 28, 2006" "launchd"

.SH NAME
launchd

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B launchd 
.RI [ "-dvsx" ] 
.RI [ "-S session type" ] 
.RI [ "-U session user" ]
.RI [ "-- command " [ "args ..." ]]

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBLaunchd\fP is a system startup program that was first introduced by Apple in Mac OS X 10.4 (Tiger) and ported to SolidBSD by InfoWeapons
Corporation. The launchd daemon supersedes tasks traditionally performed by cron, mach_init and init. On many Unix and Unix-like systems, init
runs the startup scripts, maintains the system levels, and launches and kills services. Since init predates some networking support, however,
network services are not generally run through it.

\fBLaunchd\fP acts as a single control interface for the many programs started automatically by the system. A standard configuration file format 
is used to determine when to run a given program, specify resource limits and set environment variables.

Using \fBlaunchd\fP also improves system performance since at any given time it only launches daemons that are actually used. Daemons can also 
self-terminate and, if again needed, can be restarted.

\fBLaunchd\fP may also be run with a command, as in:

.B
.RS
launchd 
.RI [ "-- command "  [ "args ..." ]]
.RE

This will launch a separate instance of \fBlaunchd\fP. The command run with \fBlaunchd\fP will also be added to the list of jobs launchd 
maintains.

During bootup, the SolidBSD kernel runs \fBlaunchd\fP as the first process on the system (pid 1) and uses it to launch other essential services. 

.SH OPTIONS

The options for \fBlaunchd\fP are as follows:

.B
-S 
.RI [ "session_type" ]
.RS
Run \fBlaunchd\fP using the specified session type
.RE

.B
-U
.RI [ "username" ]
.RS
Run \fBlaunchd\fP using the specified user
.RE

.TP
.B
-d
Run \fBlaunchd\fP as a daemon. This option detaches the process from the terminal and, when running \fBlaunchd\fP as pid 1, indicates mounting 
devfs

.TP
.B
-s
Run \fBlaunchd\fPin single-user mode

.TP
.B
-x 
Run \fBlaunchd\fP in safe-boot mode 

.TP
.B
-v 
Run \fBlaunchd\fP in verbose mode while booting

.TP
.B
-h
Displays the help page
	
.SH CONFIGURATION INFORMATION

\fBLaunchd\fP reads configuration data from SolidBase (sqlite3 wrapper)

.SH FILES

The following files are installed for the \fBlaunchd\fP package (these files, however, only serve as fallback in the event SolidBase fails):

.RS
/sbin/launchd
.br
/sbin/launchctl
.br
/etc/launchd.conf
.br
/etc/launchd/rc_plist/
.br
/etc/launchd/scripts/
.br
/etc/launchd/system/
.br
/etc/launchd/crone/
.br
/etc/launchd/user/
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
launchctl(1), launchd.plist(5), solidbase(8)

.SH AUTHOR

This manual page was developed by the InfoWeapons Corporation SolidBSD Documentation Team.
