.\"
.TH launchctl 1 "July 25, 2006" "laumchctl"

.SH NAME
launchctl - Control program for launchd


.SH SYNOPSIS
.B launchctl
.RI [ "subcommand" 
.RI [ "arguments ..."]]
.P

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBLaunchctl\fP is the accompanying control program for \fBlaunchd\fP which allows for a higher level of user interaction. Launchctl 
allows users to start, stop or restart individual jobs without affecting others, set resource limits for future jobs and add 
individual jobs to the system without causing any interruptions to other existing services. 

\fBLaunchtcl\fP accepts command line arguments. Users can specify individual job files, or directories containing job files to launchctl's load 
and unload subcommands. Launchctl will read commands from standard input if no command line arguments are given. A command prompt is available 
if standard input is a terminal.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS

.B load 
.RI [ "-w" ] 
.RI [ "paths" ]...
.RS
Load configuration files and/or directories

The \fB-w\fP option removes the disabled key and writes the configuration files back to the disk
.RE

.B
unload 
.RI [ "-w" ] 
.RI [ "paths" ]...
.RS
Unload configuration files and/or directories

The \fB-w\fP option adds the disabled key and writes the configuration filesback to the disk
.RE

.B
start 
.RI [ "joblabels.." ]
.RS
Start job specified by label
.RE


.B
stop 
.RI [ "joblabels.." ]
.RS
Stop job specified by label
.RE

.TP
.B
list
Lists the jobs loaded into launchd and information about them
.P

.B
setenv 
.RI [ "key" ]
.RI [ "value" ]
.RS
Set a launchd environment variable. The \fBkey\fP specifies the variable, and \fBvalue\fP is the value of the variable
.RE

.B
unsetenv 
.RI [ "key" ]
.RS
Unset a launchd environment variable specified by \fBkey\fP
.RE

.B
getenv 
.RI [ "key" ]
.RS
Get a launchd environmental variable
.RE

.TP
.B
export
Export launchd environment variables. The shell may use these in an eval statement.
.P

.B
getrusage 
.RI [ "self " | " children" ]
.RS
View resource usage statistics for launchd or its child processes
.RE

.B
log 
.RI [ "level loglevel" ] 
.RI [ "only " | " mask loglevels..."]
.RS
View or change the logging level syslog(3) mask for launchd. The available log levels are: debug, info, notice, warning, error, critical, alert, 
and emergency.
.RE

.B
limit 
.RI [ "cpu " | " filesize " | " data " | " stack " | " core " | " rss " | " memlock " | " maxproc " | " maxfiles" ] 
.RI [ "both " [ "soft " | " hard" ]]
.RS
View and adjust launchd resource limits

If no arguments are given, this will utilize getrlimit(2) to retrieve and print all the resource limits set for launchd.

If a resource is specified, the limits for that resource will be shown.

If a value is specified as a third argument, both the hard and soft limits will be set to that value. 

If another value is specified as a fourth argument, it will be set as the hard limit, with the third argument set as the soft limit.
.RE

.B
stdout 
.RI [ "path" ]
.RS
Redirect launchd's standard output to the given path
.RE

.B
stderr 
.RI [ "path" ]
.RS
Redirect launchd's standard error to the given path
.RE

.B
shutdown
.RS
Prepares for system shutdown. \fBLaunchd\fP will remove all jobs.
.RE

.B
reloadttys
.RS
Have launchd reread /etc/ttys again (this option may be deprecated in the future).
.RE

.B
umask 
.RI [ "newmask" ]
.RS
View launchd's umask(2), or change it if a new umask is specified in \fBnewmask\fP.
.RE

.B
help
.RS
Prints the quick usage statement
.RE
      

.SH FILES

The \fBlaunchctl\fP executable is:

   /sbin/launchctl

Configuration settings for \fBlaunchctl\fP are stored in either of the following files:

   $HOME/.launchd.conf
   /etc/launchd.conf

.SH SEE ALSO
launchd.conf(5), launchd(8)

.SH AUTHOR

This manual page was developed by the InfoWeapons Corporation SolidBSD Documentation Team.

